     * Power Players
     * Young Success

   Money
     * Earn
     * Spend
     * Save and Invest
--
   Related Stories
     * Save and InvestHSAs are a 'powerful, yet underutilized' financial
       tool, says CFP
     * Save and Invest8 money rules for childfree people, according to a
       CFP
     * Save and InvestThe first step Gen Z should take to build an
       emergency fund
--

   Can you blame them?

   After all, it's hard to be pumped about putting money away for a
   situation you hope will never actually arise. That's why, for people
   looking to bump up their savings, a change in mental accounting might
   be in order.
--
   "Everyone has their own version of what a rainy day means to them, but
   it always has that negative connotation," says Spenser Liszt, a
   certified financial planner and founder of Motif Planning. "With a
   topic that's so vulnerable, like money, it's important to encourage
   positive language so people can have positive experiences with their
   money."

   That's why, in addition to your traditional emergency fund, some
   financial pros recommend building a so-called sunny day fund of money
   you can spend guilt-free or put toward exciting opportunities.

   Here's how they say it could work.
--

How a 'sunny day' fund can help you reach your goals

   Much of financial planning is about setting money aside for defined
   goals, such as retirement. But other opportunities for your money will
   inevitably arise. And when they do, a sunny day fund could come in
   handy.

   What that looks like is up to you. Perhaps you want money on hand for
   short-term things that come up — say, an impromptu vacation with
   friends or a fun business opportunity. In that case, keep your sunny
   day fund in an income-producing cash account, the same way you would an
--
   If you want to save for something bigger and more amorphous — say you
   want a lavish anniversary celebration or plan to eventually take a
   yearlong sabbatical from work to write a novel — favor a taxable
   brokerage account. That will allow you to invest the money in assets
   that will ostensibly grow, but also withdraw funds whenever you need
   them without penalty.

--
   day comes sooner than you think, you can always tap your sunny day fund
   now and rebuild it later.

   "That money is fungible," Baxley says. "You can move money over from
   your sunny day fund to your emergency fund instantaneously these days."

   DON'T MISS: Want to be smarter and more successful with your money,
   work & life? Sign up for our new newsletter!

   CNBC will host its virtual Your Money event on November 9 at 12 p.m.
   ET, with experts including Jim Cramer, Ben McKenzie and Farnoosh
   Torabi. Learn how to boost your finances, invest for the future, and
   mitigate risk amid record-high inflation. Register for free here.
