   (BUTTON) Spotlight
   (BUTTON) More Menu

   Business News›Definitions›Finance›Money

Categories

--
       Letter of credit
       Read More
     * NEXT DEFINITION
       Money laundering
       Read More

What is 'Money'

   Money
   The money came into existence to overcome the drawbacks of the barter
   system. Earlier, people use to exchange goods and services as a form of
   commerce. This often led to many disadvantages, one of which was the
   double coincidence of wants. To solve this problem, a standard medium
   of exchange, money, was introduced.
   What is money?
   A medium of exchange that is centralized, generally accepted,
   recognized, and facilitates transactions of goods and services, is
   known as money.
     * Money is a medium of exchange for various goods and services in an
       economy.
     * The money system varies with the governments and countries.
     * Different countries have different currencies.
     * The central authority is responsible for monitoring the monetary
       system.
     * There are many forms of money, and cryptocurrency is the newest
       addition to the forms of money and can be internationally
       exchanged.

   Characteristics of Money
   Fungible currency: A currency must be fungible which means that the
   units used as a currency must be equal in quality and shall be
   interchangeable. A non-fungible form of currency is not considered
--
   one time. It should not be perishable. A perishable good or article
   should not be used as a currency because it cannot be used multiple
   times and also cannot be stored for future transactions. Therefore, to
   conserve the future-oriented use-value of the money, a currency must be
   durable.
   Easily recognizable: The users of the money must be ascertained of its
   authenticity. In other words, the currency must be universally
   recognized. An unrecognized currency or money leads to disagreement
   with the exchange terms. A recognized currency ensures trust in the
   money system as well as its acceptance.
   Stability: A currency must be stable in terms of value. In simple
   terms, money should have a constant or increasing value. Money cannot
   be unstable whose value keeps drastically changing. An unstable
   currency can give room to the risk of a sudden drop in value which can
   hamper the acceptance and authenticity of the money system.
   Portable: A currency must be portable and can be conveniently
   transported from one place to another. The money must be divisible into
   various quantities making its use better. Money if not portable can
   lead to an exceeded cost of transportation of the currency itself.
   Therefore, money should be able to be divided into further smaller
   units to facilitate smooth transactions of various quantities of goods.
   Secondly, it should be easily transferable and portable.
   Functions of Money
   Medium of exchange: Money is the generally accepted medium of exchange
   that is used to make all the transactions. Ex- payments of goods,
   payment of tax, etc.
   A measure of Value: Money expresses the value of every service as well
   as goods. Therefore, it is a common denomination.
   Standard of deferred payments: Money is considered the standard for
   future payments. Ex- The payment of the electricity bill on the
   upcoming due date.
   Store of value: It means that money is capable of being stored and
   transferring the purchasing power from today to the future. Ex: Using
   the money in a savings account to buy new furniture.
   Distribution of social income: Income can easily be distributed with
   the help of money. Ex: Distribution of total money earned by a school
   in the form of salaries, wages, utility bills, etc.
   Basis of Credit Creation: The "store of value" function of the money
   helps in credit creation by the banks. Ex: Using the money of demand
   deposits as a tool for credit creation.
   Liquidity: Money is the most liquid asset of the economy. Ex: Credit
   cards, debit cards, cash.
   Types of Money:
   The following are the types of money:
   Market Determined Money: Any good that can be generally accepted by the
   people of the economy to exchange it indirectly for various goods and
   services between different parties is called Market determined money.
   Fiat Money and Legal Tender: The form of money that is issued by the
   government and is not backed by any commodity is known as fiat money.
   Ex: INR, Dollar, Pounds, etc. The term legal tender states the money
   that is legally issued by the government. Ex: Coins and Banknotes.
   Cryptocurrencies: Cryptocurrencies are an electronic medium of exchange
   that exists virtually. Crypto is a peer-to-peer system that runs on the
   blockchain. In simple terms, it is an intangible form of currency and
   has opportunities for international exchange.
   What is the functional definition of money?
   The functional definition of money states that the money should be
   capable of bringing a generally accepted medium of exchange, the
   measure of value, the standard of deferred payment, and a store of
   value.
   How many functions of money are there?
   There are three functions of money: Primary, secondary, and other
   functions.
   What is Convertible Virtual Currency?
   Convertible virtual Currency is used as a substitute for the legal
   money accepted in the economy. These currencies can easily be exchanged
   for fiat money like cryptocurrencies.
   Disclaimer: This content is authored by an external agency. The views
   expressed here are that of the respective authors/ entities and do not
   represent the views of Economic Times (ET). ET does not guarantee,
--

Read More News on

     * TYPES OF MONEYFIAT MONEY AND LEGAL TENDERCRYPTOBASIS OF CREDIT
       CREATION
     * INRPOUNDSCONVERTIBLE VIRTUAL CURRENCY?CONVERTIBLEDOLLAR
     * MONEYWHAT IS MONEYMONEY DEFINITION

     * PREV DEFINITION
       Letter of credit
       Read More
     * NEXT DEFINITION
       Money laundering
       Read More

   Related Definitions
--
     * Salesman and two boats

   Salesman and two boatsThe salesman was called, and he said, 'Here, take
   your money with interest because I have lots of buyers. You can make a
   beautiful house on it after the rains, and when the rains come again,
   you can make arrangements so that the water does not flow out. You will
   have a lake palace. And I will give you two boats.' And he sold two
--

     FPIs' investments in govt bonds more than doubled this year FPIs'
   investments in govt bonds more than doubled this yearThe influx of
   foreign money after a three-year hiatus has kept local sovereign bond
   yields - and therefore corporate borrowing costs - anchored amid a
   volatile inflation environment and a tight liquidity stance by the
   Reserve Bank of India.

     2023 Year in Review: How money followed deeptech companies at tech’s
   frontier 2023 Year in Review: How money followed deeptech companies at
   tech’s frontierDeeptech is a term for businesses using advanced science
   and technology to find solutions for complicated problems across over a
   dozen sectors. The year saw a steady increase in investor interest in
--
   Damani’s tips for creating a nest egg for grandchildrenRamesh Damani
   says: "If you are young and you have children who are below 5 or 10
   years or your grandchildren as in my case, open a Demat account and
   start investing for them, your money will get clubbed with them in the
   capital gains but try and buy stocks for 10-20 years and remember that
   until you sell it there is no tax consequences. So, the money can grow
   unimpeded, compounding over long periods of time."

     ET analysis: Is evergreening of loans evergreen? ET analysis: Is
