
Back to Basics

What Is Money?

   Finance & Development, September 2012, Vol. 49, No. 3

   Irena Asmundson and Ceyda Oner

   Without it, modern economies could not function
   What Is Money?

   Money may make the world go around, as the song says. And most people
   in the world probably have handled money, many of them on a daily
   basis. But despite its familiarity, probably few people could tell you
   exactly what money is, or how it works.

   In short, money can be anything that can serve as a
   o store of value, which means people can save it and use it
       later--smoothing their purchases over time;
       o unit of account, that is, provide a common base for prices; or
--

       IFRAME: http://www.youtube.com/embed/FpMB0Qhnp7E

   Perhaps the easiest way to think about the role of money is to consider
   what would change if we did not have it.

   If there were no money, we would be reduced to a barter economy. Every
   item someone wanted to purchase would have to be exchanged for
   something that person could provide. For example, a person who
   specialized in fixing cars and needed to trade for food would have to
--
   specialize. People might starve before they were able to find the right
   person with whom to barter.

   But with money, you don't need to find a particular person. You just
   need a market in which to sell your goods or services. In that market,
   you don't barter for individual goods. Instead you exchange your goods
   or services for a common medium of exchange--that is, money. You can
   then use that money to buy what you need from others who also accept
   the same medium of exchange. As people become more specialized, it is
   easier to produce more, which leads to more demand for transactions
   and, hence, more demand for money.
   [FDPromoImage.jpg]

Many monies

   To put it a different way, money is something that holds its value over
   time, can be easily translated into prices, and is widely accepted.
   Many different things have been used as money over the years--among
   them, cowry shells, barley, peppercorns, gold, and silver.

   At first, the value of money was anchored by its alternative uses, and
   the fact that there were replacement costs. For example, you could eat
   barley or use peppercorns to flavor food. The value you place on such
   consumption provides a floor for the value. Anyone could grow more, but
   it does take time, so if the barley is eaten the supply of money
   declines. On the other hand, many people may want strawberries and be
   happy to trade for them, but they make poor money because they are
   perishable. They are difficult to save for use next month, let alone
   next year, and almost impossible to use in trade with people far away.
   There is also the problem of divisibility--not everything of value is
   easily divided, and standardizing each unit is also tricky; for
   example, the value of a basket of strawberries measured against
   different items is not easy to establish and keep constant. Not only do
   strawberries make for bad money, most things do.

   But precious metals seemed to serve all three needs: a stable unit of
   account, a durable store of value, and a convenient medium of exchange.
--
   They stand up to time well. They are easily divisible into standardized
   coins and do not lose value when made into smaller units. In short,
   their durability, limited supply, high replacement cost, and
   portability made precious metals more attractive as money than other
   goods.

   Until relatively recently, gold and silver were the main currency
--
   deposits. Anyone who wanted to could go to the bank and get the
   precious metal that backs the note. Eventually, the paper claim on the
   precious metal was delinked from the metal. When that link was broken,
   fiat money was born. Fiat money is materially worthless, but has value
   simply because a nation collectively agrees to ascribe a value to it.
   In short, money works because people believe that it will. As the means
   of exchange evolved, so did its source--from individuals in barter, to
   some sort of collective acceptance when money was barley or shells, to
   governments in more recent times.

   Even though using standardized coins or paper bills made it easier to
   determine prices of goods and services, the amount of money in the
   system also played an important role in setting prices. For example, a
   wheat farmer would have at least two reasons for holding money: to use
   in transactions (cash in advance) and as a buffer against future needs
   (precautionary saving). Suppose winter is coming and the farmer wants
   to add to his store of money in anticipation of future expenses. If the
   farmer has a hard time finding people with money who want to buy wheat,
   he may have to accept fewer coins or bills in exchange for the grain.
   The result is that the price of wheat goes down because the supply of
   money is too tight. One reason might be that there just isn't enough
   gold to mint new money. When prices as a whole go down, it is called
   deflation. On the other hand, if there is more money in circulation but
   the same level of demand for goods, the value of the money will drop.
   This is inflation--when it takes more money to get the same amount of
   goods and services (see "What Is Inflation?" in the March 2010 issue of
   F&D). Keeping the demand for and supply of money balanced can be
   tricky.

Manufacturing money

   How money is measured

   Fiat money is more efficient to use than precious metals. Adjustments
   to its supply do not depend on the amount of precious metal around. But
   that adds its own complication: Precisely because there is a finite
   amount of precious metals, there is a limit on the amount of notes that
   can be issued. If there is no gold or silver to back money, how do
   governments know how much to print? That gets into the dilemmas
   governments face. On the one hand, the authorities will always be
   tempted to issue money, because governments can buy more with it, hire
   more people, pay more wages, and increase their popularity. On the
   other hand, printing too much money starts to push up prices. If people
   start expecting that prices will continue to rise, they may increase
   their own prices even faster. Unless the government acts to rein in
   expectations, trust in money will be eroded, and it may eventually
   become worthless. That is what happens during hyperinflation. To remove
   this temptation to print money willy-nilly, most countries today have
   delegated the task of deciding how much money to print to independent
   central banks, which are charged with making the call based on their
   assessment of the economy's needs and do not transfer funds to the
   government to finance its spending (see "What Is Monetary Policy?" in
   the September 2009 issue of F&D). The term "printing money" is
   something of a misnomer in itself. Most money today is in the form of
   bank deposits rather than paper currency (see box).

Belief can fade

   Countries that have been down the path of high inflation experienced
   firsthand how the value of money essentially depends on people
   believing in it. In the 1980s, people in some Latin American countries,
   such as Argentina and Brazil, gradually lost confidence in the
   currency, because inflation was eroding its value so rapidly. They
   started using a more stable one, the U.S. dollar, as the de facto
   currency. This phenomenon is called unofficial, or de facto,
   dollarization. The government loses its monopoly on issuing money--and
   dollarization can be very difficult to reverse.

   Some policies governments have used to restore confidence in a currency
   nicely highlight the "faith" part of money functioning. In Turkey, for
   example, the government rebased the currency, the lira, eliminating six
   zeros in 2005. Overnight, 1,000,000 liras became 1 lira. Brazil, on the
   other hand, introduced a new currency in 1994, the real. In both
   countries, citizens went along, demonstrating that as long as everyone
   accepts that a different denomination or a new currency is the norm, it
   simply will be. Just like fiat money. If it is accepted as money, it is
   money. fS

   Irena Asmundson and Ceyda Oner are Economists in the IMF's Strategy,
   Policy, and Review Department.
