   #alternate Did Fake Donors Give the Mayor Real Money? The F.B.I. Wants
   to Know.

   Skip to contentSkip to site index
--
   Supported by
   SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Did Fake Donors Give the Mayor Real Money? The F.B.I. Wants to Know.

   A search at the home of Mayor Eric Adams's fund-raising chief sought
   information about a so-called straw donor scheme.
--
   chief fund-raiser, as part of an investigation into whether his
   campaign had received illegal foreign campaign contributions from the
   Turkish government and Turkish nationals, disguised as coming from U.S.
   donors who had not actually given their own money, according to a
   search warrant.

   And in July, six men were indicted in Manhattan in connection with a
--
   manipulate our democracy and defraud our campaign," Mr. Adams said in a
   statement. "I want to be clear: I have no knowledge, direct or
   otherwise, of any improper fund-raising activity -- and certainly not
   of any foreign money. We will of course work with officials to respond
   to inquiries, as appropriate -- as we always have."

   The inquiries also raise questions about whether Mr. Adams's campaign
--
   In New York City, small donations are particularly appealing. A
   generous matching program provides $8 in public funds for every $1
   donated. That turns the maximum matched donation of $250 into $2,250, a
   potential enticement for anyone seeking to multiply their money.

   "That's probably the dumbest way to try to funnel money into trying to
   influence a candidate," said John Kaehny, the executive director of the
   government watchdog group Reinvent Albany. "They're all looked at by
   the Campaign Finance Board, which has the most extensive vetting and
--

   Ten years ago, John Liu, the city comptroller at the time, was a top
   contender for mayor when an investigation into his campaign uncovered a
   scheme to funnel money through straw donors.

   Two of his former associates were convicted in the scheme in 2013,
   including Jia Hou, a former Liu campaign treasurer who was in her 20s.
--

   Chris Coffey, a Democratic political strategist and Mr. Yang's campaign
   manager, said donors did not always understand that it was illegal to
   contribute money in someone else's name.

   "Donors are often oblivious to campaign finance," he said. "They think
   it's like donating to a charity where you can be reimbursed. It's added
--
   Michael Rothfeld is an investigative reporter on the Metro desk and
   co-author of the book "The Fixers." He was part of a team at The Wall
   Street Journal that won the 2019 Pulitzer Prize for national reporting
   for stories about hush money deals made on behalf of Donald Trump and a
   federal investigation of the president's personal lawyer. More about
   Michael Rothfeld
   A version of this article appears in print on  , Section A, Page 27 of
