   Skip Navigation
   logo
   logo
   (BUTTON) logo
   Success
     * Startups
     * Side Hustles
     * Power Players
     * Young Success

   Money
     * Earn
     * Spend
     * Save and Invest
     * Become Debt-Free

   Work
     * Land the Job
     * Get Ahead
     * Closing the Gap
     * Science of Success

   Life
     * Pop Culture and Media
     * Psychology and Relationships
     * Health and Wellness
     * Real Estate

   Video
     * Most Popular
     * CNBC TV

   (BUTTON) Menu
   (BUTTON) SEARCHCNBC.COM

   Related Stories
     * Save and InvestHSAs are a 'powerful, yet underutilized' financial
       tool, says CFP
     * Save and Invest8 money rules for childfree people, according to a
       CFP
     * Save and InvestThe first step Gen Z should take to build an
       emergency fund
     * Save and InvestSome cash accounts pay over 5% in interest—but don't
       load up, says expert
     * Save and InvestTax-advantaged accounts can help you save on
       health-care—here's how

   Save and Invest

60% of Americans feel behind on emergency savings—a 'sunny day' fund can
help, says CFP

   Published Thu, Nov 2 20231:00 PM EDTUpdated Fri, Nov 3 202310:44 AM EDT
   thumbnail
   Ryan Ermey
   Share (BUTTON) Share Article via Facebook (BUTTON) Share Article via
   Twitter (BUTTON) Share Article via LinkedIn (BUTTON) Share Article via
   Email
   David Lees | Stone | Getty Images

   Americans don't seem particularly eager to boost contributions to their
   emergency funds. More than 4 in 5 say they did not increase emergency
   savings this year, according to a recent survey from Bankrate, and 60%
   say they feel behind when it comes to saving for a rainy day.

   Can you blame them?

   After all, it's hard to be pumped about putting money away for a
   situation you hope will never actually arise. That's why, for people
   looking to bump up their savings, a change in mental accounting might
   be in order.

   "Everyone has their own version of what a rainy day means to them, but
   it always has that negative connotation," says Spenser Liszt, a
   certified financial planner and founder of Motif Planning. "With a
   topic that's so vulnerable, like money, it's important to encourage
   positive language so people can have positive experiences with their
   money."

   That's why, in addition to your traditional emergency fund, some
   financial pros recommend building a so-called sunny day fund of money
   you can spend guilt-free or put toward exciting opportunities.

   Here's how they say it could work.

Yes, you still need an emergency fund

   On your list of financial priorities, which may include goals such as
   saving for retirement and paying down debt, building an emergency fund
   should likely occupy the top spot, financial pros say.

   Without savings in place, a financial emergency, such as a job loss or
   a surprise medical bill, could force you to sell your investments or
   delve deeper into debt to make up the difference, essentially derailing
   your financial plan.

   Traditionally, financial planners recommend stashing three to six
   months' worth of living expenses in a safe, cash vehicle, such as a
   high-yield savings account, in case of emergencies. (Check out this
   list of the best high-yield savings accounts from CNBC Select.)

   But that's easier said than done. Less than half — 48% — of U.S. adults
   say they could cover three months' worth of expenses, according to
   Bankrate.

   If you're having trouble getting up to that number, don't beat yourself
   up. Instead, "celebrate milestones along the way," says Andy Baxley, a
   CFP and senior planner at The Planning Center. "If you're aiming for
   six months and you don't have anything, you should be celebrating when
   you get to one month of savings."

   What's more, consider the sorts of expenses your emergency fund could
   potentially cover to give yourself some piece of mind. "If you have
   insurance deductibles, it can be good to have those ready in cash for
   auto, home or any other insurance policies you might have," says Liszt.
   "Another would be cash to cover living expenses during the disability
   waiting period, or elimination period."

   Ideally, you'd have enough cash to cover every contingency, but the
   little wins you can give yourself on the way matter, too.

How a 'sunny day' fund can help you reach your goals

   Much of financial planning is about setting money aside for defined
   goals, such as retirement. But other opportunities for your money will
   inevitably arise. And when they do, a sunny day fund could come in
   handy.

   What that looks like is up to you. Perhaps you want money on hand for
   short-term things that come up — say, an impromptu vacation with
   friends or a fun business opportunity. In that case, keep your sunny
   day fund in an income-producing cash account, the same way you would an
   emergency fund.

   If you want to save for something bigger and more amorphous — say you
   want a lavish anniversary celebration or plan to eventually take a
   yearlong sabbatical from work to write a novel — favor a taxable
   brokerage account. That will allow you to invest the money in assets
   that will ostensibly grow, but also withdraw funds whenever you need
   them without penalty.

   Setting up such a fund serves a twofold purpose. Not only are you
   saving for something you actually want, but you're also keeping
   yourself from tapping into your emergency fund for non-emergencies.

   "People put their nose to the grindstone and save in their emergency
   fund, but then the opportunity to go to your best friend's wedding in
   Greece comes up, and it's like, 'Well, maybe I'll do that,'" says
   Baxley.

   He recommends earmarking a certain percentage of your emergency savings
   each month toward your sunny day fund. And in the event that the rainy
   day comes sooner than you think, you can always tap your sunny day fund
   now and rebuild it later.

   "That money is fungible," Baxley says. "You can move money over from
   your sunny day fund to your emergency fund instantaneously these days."

   DON'T MISS: Want to be smarter and more successful with your money,
   work & life? Sign up for our new newsletter!

   CNBC will host its virtual Your Money event on November 9 at 12 p.m.
   ET, with experts including Jim Cramer, Ben McKenzie and Farnoosh
   Torabi. Learn how to boost your finances, invest for the future, and
   mitigate risk amid record-high inflation. Register for free here.

   CHECK OUT: Travis Kelce says he was ‘damn near dead broke’ during his
   rookie year in the NFL
   We lost a $40M ice cream business—how we're rebuilding
   VIDEO10:2310:23
   We lost a $40M ice cream business—how we're rebuilding
   Startups
   make it

Stay in the loop

   Get Make It newsletters delivered to your inbox
   Sign Up

About Us

   Learn more about the world of CNBC Make It
   Learn More

Follow Us

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

   CNBC.COMJoin the CNBC Panel

   © 2023 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBC Universal
   Privacy PolicyDo Not Sell My Personal Information
   CA NoticeTerms of ServiceContact

   comscore
