   #alternate alternate alternate

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-T5MB575

   We use cookies to improve your experience of our website. You can find
   out more or opt-out from some cookies.

   Skip to navigation Skip to main content Skip to footer
   (BUTTON)
     * Cymraeg
     * Sign in

   ____________________ (BUTTON) Search

     * Benefits
     * Work
     * Debt and money
     * Consumer
     * Housing
     * Family
     * Law and courts
     * Immigration
     * Health
     * More from us

     * Home
     * Debt and money
     * Get help with the cost of living
     * Get help with the cost of living

Get help with the cost of living

   This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice for Northern
   Ireland, See advice for Scotland, See advice for Wales

   If you don't have enough money to live on, you might be able to get
   help to afford essentials like bills and food. This includes the
   Household Support Fund and cost of living payments.

   You should check if you can claim benefits - you might be able to do
   this even if you work, have savings or own a home.

If you owe money and you're struggling to pay

   You should speak to the organisations you owe money to - they might let
   you pay smaller amounts or take a break from payments.

   Don't ignore bills or letters about money you owe.

   You can find out how to start dealing with your debts.

Check what benefits you can get

   Lots of people miss out on benefits they're entitled to - so it's worth
   checking what you can get.

   Claiming benefits might also let you get access to other financial help
   like cost of living payments and discounts on energy and transport.

   You might be able to claim benefits or increase your current benefits
   if you're:
     * over 16 years old with a low income or no income
     * sick or disabled, including if you have a mental health condition
     * of State Pension age with a low income or no income
     * a carer
     * responsible for children

   Check what benefits you can get.

Get your first benefit payment early

   When you apply for benefits, you might be able to get your first
   payment early while you're waiting for either:
     * a decision on your application
     * your first payment

   This is called a 'short-term benefit advance'. You can get an advance
   for:
     * Universal Credit
     * Jobseeker's Allowance (JSA)
     * Employment and Support Allowance (ESA)
     * Carer's Allowance
     * Pension Credit
     * State Pension

   You'll need to pay back the advance. The Department for Work and
   Pensions (DWP) will take an amount off your future payments until
   you've paid it back. For Universal Credit, you can spread the
   repayments over 24 months. For other benefits, you'll usually repay
   your advance over 12 weeks.

   If you've applied for Universal Credit, you can check how to get a
   Universal Credit advance payment.

   If you've applied for a different benefit, contact the benefits office
   that's dealing with your claim. You can find their contact details on
   any letter or email you've had from them.

Check if you'll get a Cost of Living Payment

   The government will send you a 'Cost of Living Payment' if you:
     * get a benefit based on your income - for example, Universal Credit,
       Pension Credit, or tax credits
     * get a disability benefit - for example, Personal Independence
       Payment
     * are over State Pension age and get Winter Fuel Payments

   You'll get 1 Cost of Living Payment for each type of benefit you get.
   For example, if you get Universal Credit, Personal Independence
   Payment, and Winter Fuel Payments, you'll get 3 Cost of Living
   Payments.

   If you're not claiming benefits yet, you should check if you can claim
   benefits. It's worth starting a claim as soon as possible if you're
   eligible - this means you might be able to get Cost of Living Payments
   in the future.

If you get benefits based on your income

   You should have got a payment of £300 by 19 November 2023 if you get
   any of the following benefits:
     * Universal Credit
     * Pension Credit
     * Working Tax Credit
     * Child Tax Credit
     * income-based Jobseekers Allowance
     * income-related Employment and Support Allowance
     * Income Support

   You'll have only got one £301 payment - even if you get more than 1 of
   these benefits.

   To get the latest payment you must have:
     * been entitled to a benefits payment on any day from 18 August to 17
       September 2023
     * started a successful claim for Universal Credit by 18 August
     * started a successful claim for another income-based benefit by 17
       September 2023

   If you're waiting for a decision on your benefits claim, you won't get
   the Cost of Living Payment until your claim is successful.

   If your benefits are paid to someone else, like your landlord, you
   should still have got the Cost of Living Payment.

   If you're still eligible, the government will send you another payment
   of £299 during spring 2024.

If you haven't received a previous Cost of Living Payment

   If you think you should have received a Cost of Living Payment, you
   can report a missing payment on GOV.UK.

If you get a disability benefit

   The government gave a £150 Cost of Living Payment to people getting
   disability benefits between 20 June and 4 July 2023.

   You would have been eligible for this one-off payment if you get any of
   the following benefits:
     * Disability Living Allowance
     * Personal Independence Payment
     * Attendance Allowance
     * Armed Forces Independence Payment
     * Constant Attendance Allowance
     * War Pension Mobility Supplement

   To get this payment you must have:
     * been getting one of these benefits on 1 April 2023
     * applied for one of these benefits by 1 April 2023 - you won't get
       the payment until your claim is successful

If you haven't received a previous Cost of Living Payment

   If you think you should have received a Cost of Living Payment, you
   can report a missing payment on GOV.UK.

If you're over State Pension age and get Winter Fuel Payments

   You'll either get a £300 or £150 Cost of Living Payment, depending on
   your situation. You'll get this at the same time as your usual Winter
   Fuel Payment from November 2023.

   You'll get a £300 Cost of Living Payment if you live either:
     * on your own
     * with people who don't qualify for a Winter Fuel Payment

   If you live with someone else who qualifies for the Winter Fuel
   Payment, the amount you'll get depends on whether either of you get any
   of the following:
     * Pension Credit
     * income-related Employment Support Allowance
     * income-based Jobseeker's Allowance

   If either you or the person you live with gets one of these benefits,
   you'll both get £300 - as long as you're not partners. If you're
   partners, you'll only get one £300 payment.

   If neither of you gets one of these benefits, you'll both get £150.

   If you live in residential care and qualify for the Winter Fuel
   Payment, you'll get £150 unless you get any of these benefits.

Check if you need to apply for Winter Fuel Payments

   You're usually entitled to Winter Fuel Payments if you're of State
   Pension age in the third week of September. The State Pension age is
   66.

   You should start getting the Winter Fuel Payment automatically once you
   reach State Pension age. You might need to apply if you're in one of
   these situations:
     * you don't get State Pension
     * you don't get another benefit
     * you live in the EU, Switzerland, Norway, Iceland or Liechtenstein

   You can find out how to apply for the Winter Fuel Payment on GOV.UK.

Get help with your energy bills

   If you're struggling to pay your energy bills or top up your prepayment
   meter, you might be able to get help - for example a fuel voucher or a
   grant from your energy supplier.

   Check if you can get help to pay your energy bills.

   You might be able to save money on your energy bills by switching to a
   different supplier, or to a different tariff with your current
   supplier. Check if you can switch.

Check how to make your home more energy efficient

   If your home is energy efficient, you'll pay less to heat your home and
   it will stay warm for longer.

   It's a good idea to look into making your home more energy efficient at
   any time of the year. This is because it can take a few months to sort
   things out - for example, to find someone who can do the work.

   You might be able to apply for help with the cost of:
     * a new boiler
     * boiler repairs
     * loft or cavity wall insulation
     * a heat pump

   Check if you can get help with the cost of energy efficiency.

If you need somewhere to stay warm

   You can ask your local council if they have information about nearby
   `warm spaces'. These are public places that anyone can use to stay warm
   - for example a community space like a library. You can find out how to
   contact your local council on GOV.UK.

Get help with essential costs

   Your local council might help you pay for things like:
     * your energy and water bills
     * food
     * essential items - for example, clothes or an oven

   This help is known as 'welfare assistance' or the `Household Support
   Fund'. Each council runs their own scheme. You'll need to check if you
   can get support and what type of support you can get.

   Ask your local council if they run a welfare assistance or Household
   Support Fund scheme. You can find out how to contact your local council
   on GOV.UK.

   You don't have to be getting benefits to get help from your local
   council. If you do get benefits, they won't be affected if you start
   getting money from a welfare assistance or Household Support Fund
   scheme.

   There are also other things you can do if you're struggling to afford
   essentials like rent or food.

Get help paying for rent, council tax and other bills

   There are things you can do if you're struggling to pay your rent and
   bills.

   You can check what help and support you can get with your rent and
   bills.

Get help paying for food

   If you're struggling to pay for food, you might be able to get a
   referral to a food bank.

   You can find out how to get help from a food bank.

If you have a child or are pregnant

   You might be able to get a Healthy Start card to help you buy certain
   types of milk, infant formula, fruit and vegetables.

   To get the Healthy Start card you must be at least 10 weeks pregnant or
   have a child under 4 years old. You must also be getting either:
     * Universal Credit - but only if your household earns £408 a month or
       less
     * Income Support
     * income-based Jobseeker's Allowance
     * income-related Employment and Support Allowance - but only if
       you're pregnant
     * Pension Credit
     * Child Tax Credit - but only if your household earns £16,190 a year
       or less

   If you get Child Tax Credit, you can't get the card if you also get
   Working Tax Credit - unless you get the `run-on' payment. Working Tax
   Credit run-on is the payment you get for 4 weeks after you stop
   qualifying for Working Tax Credit.

   With the Healthy Start card you'll get:
     * £4.25 each week from week 10 of your pregnancy
     * £8.50 each week for children from birth to 1 year old
     * £4.25 each week for children between 1 and 4 years old
     * free vitamins

   You can apply for the Healthy Start scheme on the NHS website.

Get help with health costs

   You might be able to get help paying for NHS charges, for example:
     * prescriptions
     * dental treatment
     * sight tests, glasses and contact lenses
     * travel to NHS treatment

   Check if you can get help with health costs on the NHS website.

If you pay for regular prescriptions

   If you can't get help to pay for your prescriptions, you might be able
   to save money by buying a prepayment certificate.

   You'll pay a fixed price for either 3 or 12 months. This will cover the
   cost of all the prescriptions you need during that time.

   You can buy a prepayment certificate for unlimited prescriptions for:
     * £31.25 for 3 months
     * £111.60 for 12 months - you can pay this in 10 instalments of
       £11.16

   You can buy a prepayment certificate on the NHS website.

If you've been prescribed hormone replacement therapy (HRT)

   If you already have a prepayment certificate for other medicines, it
   covers the cost of your HRT.

   If you only need a certificate for HRT, you might be able to save
   money. You can get an HRT prescription prepayment certificate -  it
   costs £19.30 for 12 months.

   The certificate only covers certain HRT medicines. Check if your HRT
   medicine is covered on the NHS website. If you have HRT medicines that
   aren't covered, you'll have to pay for them or buy a normal prepayment
   certificate.

   You can buy an HRT prescription prepayment certificate on the NHS
   website.

Get help with your energy and water if you're disabled

   If you're disabled, you might be able to get extra support with your
   energy and water. You can check how to get free advice about energy and
   water bills on the Scope website.

Get help if you have children or are pregnant

   You might be able to get help if:
     * your child is at school
     * your child is in childcare
     * you're pregnant or you've recently had a baby

If your child is at school

   If you're on a low income or claim certain benefits, you might be able
   to get help with the costs of sending your children to school.

   For example, you could get:
     * free school meals
     * free transport to school
     * a grant to help to buy school clothes or uniforms
     * help with school trips

   Find out more about getting help with school costs.

If your child is in childcare

   If you're on a low income or claim certain benefits, you might be able
   to get help with childcare costs. For example:
     * if you work and claim Universal Credit, you might be able to claim
       back up to 85% of your childcare costs - you could get up to
       £950.92 a month for 1 child under 17 or £1,630.15 for 2 or more
       children
     * if you have a 2 year old, you might be able to claim up to 15 hours
       of free childcare a week

   If you work, you might be able to claim Tax-Free Childcare. This is a
   government scheme that helps parents with childcare costs like holiday
   clubs, childminders and nurseries. You can get up to:
     * £2,000 a year for each child under 12
     * £4,000 a year for each disabled child under 17

   You won't be able to receive Child Tax Credit, Working Tax Credit,
   Universal Credit or childcare vouchers if you get Tax-Free Childcare.
   Work out which option is best for you before applying.

   If you have a 3 or 4 year old, you can get up to 570 free hours of
   early education or childcare a year. If you work, you might be able to
   claim more.

   Check what help you're eligible for on the UK government's Childcare
   Choices website.

If you're pregnant or have a baby

   You could get a one-off payment of £500 to help towards the costs of
   having a baby. You usually qualify if you get certain benefits and are
   having your first baby - you have to claim before your baby is 6 months
   old. Find out how to apply for a Sure Start Maternity Grant on GOV.UK.

   You might be able to get support from a local baby bank - these offer
   free essentials like nappies, toys, shoes and clothes.

   Some food banks also provide nappies, baby wipes and baby food.

   Search online to find your nearest baby bank or food bank - or speak to
   your midwife or health visitor.

   Find out more about maternity pay and parental rights.

Get help with travel costs

   Contact your local council to check if they offer free or discounted
   travel - for example, if you're:
     * in education
     * on a work placement
     * unemployed and looking for work
     * a veteran

   You can find your local council on GOV.UK.

   If you're over State Pension age, you can get free bus travel. Apply
   for an older person's bus pass on GOV.UK.

   If you're 60 or over and live in London, you can get free travel on
   London's transport services. You can apply for a 60+ London Oyster
   photocard on the TFL website.

   If you're disabled, you might be able to apply for a bus pass or
   railcard. You can check if you can get help with the cost of transport.

Get help with pets

   If you're using a food bank, you might be able to ask for some things,
   like pet food. Check with your local food bank if they're able to help.

   You can also check if there's a pet food bank in your area. Ask your
   local vet or pet shop, or search online for 'pet food bank' and your
   local town.

   You might be able to find free pet food collection points at your local
   supermarket, pet store or animal charity.

Get help with vet care

   You might be eligible for free or reduced vet care from Blue Cross if
   you:
     * get certain means-tested benefits
     * live close to one of their hospitals or clinics

   Check if you can get free or reduced vet care on the Blue Cross
   website.

   You also might be able to get free or reduced vet care from charities
   such as RSPCA and PDSA.

   Check if you can get free or reduced vet care on the RSPCA website.

   Check if you can get free or reduced vet care on the PDSA website.

Get help with vet bills

   If you're struggling to pay your vet bills, talk to your vet about
   payment options - like reducing the bill or setting up a payment plan.

   If you can't set up an affordable payment plan, you should get debt
   advice. Your vet might decide to stop treating your pet if you owe
   money.

Work out your budget

   You should use a budgeting tool to help you understand:
     * what money you've got coming in and what you have going out
     * where you might be able to cut costs

   You can use a budgeting tool.

Apply for a charitable grant

   You might be able to get extra money from a charity to help with living
   costs. Some of these charitable grants are open to everyone. Others
   might be available based on your situation, for example:
     * if you have a disability or health condition
     * your age
     * your previous or current job

   You can check what help you can get from local and national charities
   on the Turn2us website. You'll need to know your postcode.

If you're over 55 and have a personal pension

   You might be able to take some money from your pension savings to help
   pay for essential costs or to pay off your debts.

   You should think about whether taking money from your pension is the
   best financial decision for you. Taking money from your pension will
   mean you have less income when you retire. If you're getting benefits,
   taking money from your pension could affect your claim.

   You can get free guidance on your pension options from Pension Wise.
   They'll explain the different options so you can decide which is best
   for you.

   You should also get financial advice before taking any money from your
   pension savings - you'll have to pay.

   You can check how to find a financial adviser - they can tell you which
   option is best for you.

If you're finding things difficult

   Your mental health is as important as your physical health. You should
   talk to your GP if your money problems are affecting your mental
   health.

   You can find other ways to get help with your mental health on the Mind
   website.

If you need to speak to someone

   You can speak to a trained volunteer at organisations like Samaritans
   or Shout.

Samaritans

   Helpline: 116 123 (Monday to Sunday at any time)

   Welsh Language Line: 0808 164 0123 (Monday to Sunday 7pm to 11pm)

   Calls to Samaritans are free.

   You can find other ways to get in touch with Samaritans on their
   website.

Shout

   You can also text 'SHOUT' to 85258 to start a conversation with a
   trained Shout volunteer. Texts are free, anonymous and confidential
   from anywhere in the UK.

If you think it's an emergency

   If you think your life or someone else's is at risk, you should call
   999 or go to A&E if you can.

   You can also find a list of urgent mental health services on the Mind
   website.

Help us improve our website

   Take 3 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website.
   Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they
   need.

   Page last reviewed on 30 October 2023

Related content

     * Get help with the cost of living

   Is there anything wrong with this page? Let us know

Advice

     * Benefits
     * Work
     * Debt and money
     * Consumer
     * Housing
     * Family
     * Law and courts
     * Immigration
     * Health

Resources and tools

     * Adviser resources
     * Education resources
     * Site search
     * A-Z of advice

More from us

     * About us
     * Contact us
     * Support us
     * Annual reports
     * Complaints
     * Media
     * Modern slavery statement
     * Policy research
     * Volunteering
     * Jobs

About this site

     * Accessibility statement
     * Terms and conditions
     * Privacy and cookies

   Copyright ©2023 Citizens Advice. All rights reserved.

   Citizens Advice is an operating name of the National Association of
   Citizens Advice Bureaux. Registered charity number 279057. VAT number
   726 0202 76. Company limited by guarantee. Registered number 01436945
   England. Registered office: Citizens Advice, 3rd Floor North, 200
   Aldersgate, London, EC1A 4HD

   (BUTTON)
