   #alternate Did Fake Donors Give the Mayor Real Money? The F.B.I. Wants
   to Know.

   Skip to contentSkip to site index
   New York


   Today’s Paper

   (BUTTON)

Adams Campaign Investigation

     * The Latest
     * What We Know
     * Adams’s Turkey Ties
     * Who Is Brianna Suggs?
     * At the Mayor’s Doorstep

     * U.S. (BUTTON)
     * World (BUTTON)
     * Business (BUTTON)
     * Arts (BUTTON)
     * Lifestyle (BUTTON)
     * Opinion (BUTTON)
     * Audio (BUTTON)
     * Games (BUTTON)
     * Cooking (BUTTON)
     * Wirecutter (BUTTON)
     * The Athletic (BUTTON)

   Adams Campaign Investigation
     * The Latest
     * What We Know
     * Adams’s Turkey Ties
     * Who Is Brianna Suggs?
     * At the Mayor’s Doorstep

   Advertisement
   SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Adams Campaign Investigation

     * The Latest
     * What We Know
     * Adams’s Turkey Ties
     * Who Is Brianna Suggs?
     * At the Mayor’s Doorstep

   Supported by
   SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Did Fake Donors Give the Mayor Real Money? The F.B.I. Wants to Know.

   A search at the home of Mayor Eric Adams’s fund-raising chief sought
   information about a so-called straw donor scheme.
     * (BUTTON) Share full article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * 136

   Mayor Eric Adams stands at a podium in a white dress shirt and blue
   patterned tie with no jacket.
   A search warrant suggested investigators were examining whether Mr.
   Adams’s campaign had received illegal contributions from Turkish
   sources. Credit...Hiroko Masuike/The New York Times
   Emma G. Fitzsimmons Michael Rothfeld

   By Emma G. Fitzsimmons and Michael Rothfeld
   Nov. 4, 2023

   It is a type of scheme that took down New York’s lieutenant governor
   last year, and sank the 2013 mayoral campaign of a top Democratic
   contender: the use of so-called straw donors to funnel illegal
   contributions to candidates from secret sources.

   Now, for the second time, the campaign of Mayor Eric Adams is being
   scrutinized for the same thing.

   On Thursday, the F.B.I. searched the home of Brianna Suggs, Mr. Adams’s
   chief fund-raiser, as part of an investigation into whether his
   campaign had received illegal foreign campaign contributions from the
   Turkish government and Turkish nationals, disguised as coming from U.S.
   donors who had not actually given their own money, according to a
   search warrant.

   And in July, six men were indicted in Manhattan in connection with a
   similar scheme, accused of funneling thousands to Mr. Adams’s campaign.
   Two brothers have pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor conspiracy charge in
   the case, and the news outlet The City and other organizations have
   found additional inconsistencies in donations to the mayor’s campaign.

   Neither Mr. Adams nor Ms. Suggs has been accused of wrongdoing, and Mr.
   Adams has denied any knowledge of illegal contributions. But both
   investigations appear to be focused on whether donors who were eager to
   get Mr. Adams’s attention sought to mask large donations by funneling
   them through straw donors — and on who might have coordinated that
   effort.

   “I am outraged and angry if anyone attempted to use the campaign to
   manipulate our democracy and defraud our campaign,” Mr. Adams said in a
   statement. “I want to be clear: I have no knowledge, direct or
   otherwise, of any improper fund-raising activity — and certainly not of
   any foreign money. We will of course work with officials to respond to
   inquiries, as appropriate — as we always have.”

   The inquiries also raise questions about whether Mr. Adams’s campaign
   was properly vetting its donations to root out abuse. Andrew Yang’s
   rival 2021 mayoral campaign had two staff members vet donations over
   $100, according to a person who was familiar with the matter.

   A lawyer for Mr. Adams’s 2021 campaign, Vito Pitta, said in an email
   that the campaign had worked to flag and investigate any questionable
   contributions rigorously. Mr. Pitta said the campaign had received over
   10,000 donations, and had worked to match handwriting and signatures,
   review donors’ affirmation forms and more.

   “Immediately upon learning about the federal inquiry, the campaign
   started an extensive review of all documents and actions by campaign
   workers connected to the contributors in question,” Mr. Pitta said.

   In New York City, small donations are particularly appealing. A
   generous matching program provides $8 in public funds for every $1
   donated. That turns the maximum matched donation of $250 into $2,250, a
   potential enticement for anyone seeking to multiply their money.

   “That’s probably the dumbest way to try to funnel money into trying to
   influence a candidate,” said John Kaehny, the executive director of the
   government watchdog group Reinvent Albany. “They’re all looked at by
   the Campaign Finance Board, which has the most extensive vetting and
   audit process in the United States. I think it’s actually a sign of
   amateurism.”

   The city’s Campaign Finance Board examines donations closely and has
   pored over those to Mr. Adams’s first mayoral campaign.

   Mr. Adams, a moderate Democrat and former police captain, has been
   involved in politics for decades, and his fund-raising tactics have
   repeatedly pushed the boundaries of campaign-finance and ethics laws.

   As a state senator, he became embroiled in a scandal after a committee
   he led helped choose a provider of video-lottery machines at Aqueduct
   Racetrack.

   And according to an indictment in the Manhattan case, a retired police
   inspector who worked and socialized with Mr. Adams told one prospective
   donor that Mr. Adams “doesn’t want to do anything if he doesn’t get 25
   Gs” — a reference to the $25,000 minimum he expected for attending a
   campaign fund-raising event.

   The early-morning search at Ms. Suggs’s Brooklyn home came as part of a
   broad public corruption investigation. Ms. Suggs, 25, is in the mayor’s
   inner circle and close with Ingrid Lewis-Martin, Mr. Adams’s longtime
   top aide and confidante, who has taken an active role in his campaigns
   and those of others.

   The warrant suggested that foreign nationals had made campaign
   contributions through a straw donor scheme.

   The warrant authorized agents to seize evidence related to payments or
   reimbursements made to employees of KSK Construction Group in Brooklyn,
   “or other persons serving as conduits for campaign contributions to the
   Adams Campaign originating from Turkish nationals.”

   City campaign finance records reflect contributions to Mr. Adams’s
   first mayoral campaign from 11 KSK employees, all on May 7, 2021,
   totaling nearly $14,000. Nine of the 11 were in the identical amount of
   $1,250; most were eligible to earn matching funds for the campaign, the
   records show.

   Ten years ago, John Liu, the city comptroller at the time, was a top
   contender for mayor when an investigation into his campaign uncovered a
   scheme to funnel money through straw donors.

   Two of his former associates were convicted in the scheme in 2013,
   including Jia Hou, a former Liu campaign treasurer who was in her 20s.
   Mr. Liu, who is now a state senator representing a Queens district, was
   not charged, but his mayoral campaign never recovered and he finished
   fourth in the Democratic primary.

   Last year, Brian Benjamin, New York’s lieutenant governor at the time,
   resigned after he was indicted in what federal prosecutors described as
   a brazen scheme that appeared to involve straw donors.

   Mr. Benjamin was accused of accepting thousands of dollars in illegal
   donations from developer for his 2020 State Senate campaign and his
   unsuccessful 2021 bid for New York City comptroller, the indictment
   said. (A federal judge later dismissed bribery charges against Mr.
   Benjamin, but let two counts of falsifying records related to straw
   donations stand.)

   Chris Coffey, a Democratic political strategist and Mr. Yang’s campaign
   manager, said donors did not always understand that it was illegal to
   contribute money in someone else’s name.

   “Donors are often oblivious to campaign finance,” he said. “They think
   it’s like donating to a charity where you can be reimbursed. It’s added
   pressure for every campaign to make sure folks know the rules.”

   Whether Mr. Adams knew any details about potential straw donors to his
   campaign, he has given the appearance that he is open to being
   influenced, Mr. Kaehny of Reinvent Albany said.

   “There’s a big concern that the city is for sale and that New York has
   gone back to the bad old days where pay to play and bribery were just a
   part of political life,” he said.

   Emma G. Fitzsimmons is the City Hall Bureau Chief for The Times,
   covering Mayor Eric Adams and his administration. More about Emma G.
   Fitzsimmons

   Michael Rothfeld is an investigative reporter on the Metro desk and
   co-author of the book “The Fixers.” He was part of a team at The Wall
   Street Journal that won the 2019 Pulitzer Prize for national reporting
   for stories about hush money deals made on behalf of Donald Trump and a
   federal investigation of the president's personal lawyer. More about
   Michael Rothfeld
   A version of this article appears in print on  , Section A, Page 27 of
   the New York edition with the headline: Warrant Suggests F.B.I. Is
   Looking for Fake Donors to Adams Campaign. Order Reprints | Today’s
   Paper | Subscribe
   136
     * (BUTTON) Share full article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * 136

   Advertisement
   SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Site Index

Site Information Navigation

     * © 2024 The New York Times Company

     * NYTCo
     * Contact Us
     * Accessibility
     * Work with us
     * Advertise
     * T Brand Studio
     * Your Ad Choices
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Service
     * Terms of Sale
     * Site Map
     * Canada
     * International
     * Help
     * Subscriptions

     * Manage Privacy Preferences

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-P528B3&gtm_auth=tfAzqo1
   rYDLgYhmTnSjPqw&gtm_preview=env-130&gtm_cookies_win=x
